12 Avishek Anand, Lijun Lyu, Maximilian Idahl, Yumeng Wang, Jonas Wallat, and Zijian Zhang
architecture and uses pre-trained weights from BART [71]. The authors introduce two settings
for search result explanations: 1) comprehensive explanation generation, where the explanation
contains all query aspects covered by each document, and 2) novelty explanation generation,
where the explanation contains a description of the relevant information of a document that is
novel, considering all the preceding documents in the ranked list. Two weakly labeled datasets
are constructed from Wikipedia to train LiEGe for these two settings, the evaluation dataset is
constructed using query logs from the MIMICS dataset [140].
4.3 Evaluation of Free-text Explanations
The evaluation of free-text explanations is generally based on the availability of ground-truth
explanations. Although explanations are not included in most IR datasets, proxy explanations can
be created from query descriptions, query aspect annotations, topic annotations, or click logs [97,
138, 143]. BLEU [87] and ROUGE [72], two metrics commonly used to evaluate text summarization
and machine translation tasks, can be used to compare generated free-text explanations with
reference explanations. Furthermore, Rahimi et al. [97] and Yu et al. [138] use BERTScore [144] to
measure semantic coherence. However, human-annotated but model-independent ground-truth
explanations can only be used to evaluate the plausibility of generated explanations. Whether the
generated explanations are faithful to the ranking model being explained remains an open question.
Only Singh and Anand [113] evaluate the faithfulness of their query intent explanations since they
have to ensure that the interpretable ranker used during optimization closely mimics the black-box
ranking model being explained. To examine whether GenEx explanations actually help users,
Rahimi et al. [97] conduct a user study. Specifically, they collect explanation preferences, linguistic
quality ratings, and relevance judgments from crowd-workers, comparing GenEx explanations
with different baseline explanations.
5 ADVERSARIAL EXAMPLES
Adversarial examples are commonly used to demonstrate the fragility or robustness of machine
learning models. However, they can also serve as explanations and provide valuable insight. In
fact, adversarial examples are closely related to counterfactual examples, but instead of providing
actionable recourse, the goal is to fool machine learning models. Given an individual input to a
model, a corresponding adversarial example is crafted by applying small deliberate perturbations to
deceive a model into making a wrong prediction. The resulting adversarial examples inform about
the minimal input changes required to change a prediction and thus provide insight into the decision
behavior of the model. Specifically, the adversarial perturbations indicate which input features have
to change by how much to alter a predicted outcome. Compared to feature attributions (Section 3),
adversarial explanations are contrastive explanations, since the adversarial example is always
compared to the unmodified input example. From the perspective of social science, Miller [81]
argues that such contrastive explanations can be considered more human-grounded.
5.1 Adversarial Examples in Ranking
Most of the work on adversarial examples is concerned with classification tasks, where a wrong
prediction is defined by comparing the predicted label with a target label. For ranking tasks, the
main objective of an adversarial perturbation is to cause a relatively large rank promotion or rank
demotion of a document. For example, a company aiming to optimize search engines could leverage
adversarial attacks to promote a specific web page to the top of a search result page with minor
changes in the page content itself.
Pre-print