Raval and Verma [99] generate adversarial examples for black-box retrieval models that lower
the position of a top-ranked document with minimal changes to the document text. Given the nondifferentiability of replacing discrete tokens, they optimize adversarial examples using a stochastic
evolutionary algorithm with a one-token-at-a-time replacement strategy. Wu et al. [135] take a
different approach by training a surrogate model based on pseudo-relevance feedback, which is
used to approximate the gradient of the underlying black box ranking model. This approximated
gradient is then used to find adversarial perturbations that promote a target document. Additionally,
the adversarial perturbations are restricted by semantic similarity to the original document. The
authors argue that the perturbations are imperceptible and evade spam detection when constraining
the perturbations to semantic synonyms. Goren et al . [45] craft adversarial examples for the
LambdaMART LTR model. For a given query, they use past rankings to create perturbations by
replacing passages in the target document with passages from other high-ranked documents.
Wang et al. [132] use gradient-based optimization to generate adversarial examples for BERTbased ranking models. They add or replace a few tokens in documents that cause significant rank
promotions and demotions.
5.2 Universal Adversarial Triggers
While adversarial examples focus on input perturbations that change the prediction of individual
inputs, universal adversarial triggers [130] are input-agnostic perturbations that lead to a model
making a specific prediction whenever the trigger is concatenated to any input. Starting from
an initial sequence of tokens, a trigger is optimized via a gradient-based search algorithm that
iteratively replaces tokens. The effect of replacing a discrete token is usually approximated using
HotFlip [33]. Since the resulting triggers transfer across input examples, they can be used to explain
the global behavior of a model and can reveal global patterns.
5.2.1 Universal Triggers for Text Ranking. Wang et al. [132] adapt universal adversarial triggers for
text-based ranking models. They propose a global ranking attack to find trigger tokens that are
adversarial to all queries contained in a dataset. Specifically, they optimize a fixed-length trigger
so that any document to which it is concatenated will be demoted (or promoted) as much as
possible for any given query. In their experiments with BERT-based ranking models fine-tuned on
ClueWeb09 [18] and MS MARCO [86], they discover topical patterns within and between datasets
and expose potential dataset and model biases. For example, the trigger
hinduism earthquakes childbirth tornadoes Wikipedia
promotes a document by 63 ranks on average, and the trigger
acceptable competition rayon favour ##kei
demotes a document by 84 ranks on average across all queries. In general, finding triggers for which
highly relevant documents get demoted appears easier than finding triggers for which low-ranked
documents are promoted.
6 AXIOMATIC ANALYSIS OF TEXT RANKING MODELS
Unlike current data-driven, parameterized models for relevance estimation, traditional IR approaches to ranking involve probabilistic models of relevance such as BM25 [ 3] and axiomatic
approaches. Both approaches have a top-down defined notion of relevance, allowing for some sort of
interpretability. Yet, the probabilistic models are currently dominant and axiomatic approaches less
popular. In contrast to the recent development of neural, and therefore less interpretable, rankers,
Axiomatic IR postulates and formalizes the properties of principled rankers. The term axiom in IR
