rankers that lead to their good ranking performance. They attribute the model’s matching ability
to three properties (concepts), relevance, document length, and term frequency. They devise a
behavioral-probing setup that verifies to what extent the model could capture these concepts. For
manipulation-sensitivity analysis, they test the effect of shuffled words, sentences, or typos on the
model performance. Lastly, MacAvaney et al. [78] create probing sets for writing style concepts
such as fluency, formality, or factuality. Their results suggest that neural rankers are biased toward
factually correct articles and that appending irrelevant text can improve the relevance scores.
Similarly, the work by Fan et al. [35] strives to understand the relevance-modeling of IR models.
They also propose to probe for a large set of lexical, syntactic, and semantic concepts such as
named entities or coreference resolution ability. By comparing the performance of their fine-tuned
models to a pre-trained BERT, they find that these IR models generally seem to sacrifice small
parts of their ability to perform lexical and syntactic tasks and improve especially in semantic
matching (e.g., identifying synonyms). Furthermore, causal intervention analysis is applied to the
model parameters, input features, and training objectives, resulting in suggesting that a careful
intervention on linguistic properties can improve the performance of downstream IR models.
7.3 Probing other Information Retrieval Models
In addition to the core ranking objective, models for other IR-related tasks have been probed.
van Aken et al. [124] investigate BERT embeddings of a QA model and how do they interact over
the layers when answering questions. Specifically, they probed a pre-trained BERT and a QA
model, finding that training the model for QA improves the performance on related tasks such
as question type classification or identification of supporting facts. The question of how BERT
reacts to fine-tuning has also been investigated in several studies [35, 124, 131]. Cai et al. [17] probe
MRC (machine reading comprehension) models for relevant subtasks (synonyms, abbreviations,
coreference, as well as question type classification). They find that only for core MRC subtasks, the
token representation varies in the later layers of the MRC model. The core MRC subtasks include
tasks such as coreference, question type classification, and answer boundary detection. However,
for tasks like synonym and abbreviation detection, the representations are only moderately different
from the pre-trained BERT representations. Wallat et al. [131] probe models fine-tuned for various
tasks to assess the effect of fine-tuning on (factual) knowledge retention. In their layer-wise
experiments, they find the ranking model to be specifically knowledgeable, dropping the least
amount of knowledge compared to the question-answering and named entity recognition models.
Additionally, large parts, though not all, of the factual knowledge seem to be captured in the latter
layers. Petroni et al. [89] identify the requirement of world knowledge for many IR tasks such
as open-domain question-answering, slot filling, entity linking, or fact-checking. To understand
to what extent do current models capture real-world knowledge, Petroni et al . [89] propose a
benchmark containing knowledge-intensive tasks (QA, slot filling, entity linking, fact-checking,
among others) all derived from a single Wikipedia corpus.
7.4 Evaluation
In the past, probing results have been evaluated differently by the interpretability community
than other post hoc methods. Whereas other methods such as feature attributions have been
rigorously evaluated concerning metrics such as fidelity or faithfulness, this has not been the case
in the probing literature. As suggested by Belinkov [9], a standard probing setting can answer the
question: What information can be decoded from the model’s embeddings? It does not offer a humancentered explanation for a specific data instance, but rather provides general information about the
model. Thereafter, it does not offer interpretability for users but for model developers, although the
probing methodology has been scrutinized and extended in various works [52, 119, 127]. Given the
