ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
1
2
3
4
5
9.37
9.34
9.31
9.31
9.29
10 Yoga Poses You Can Do in a Chair | Chair pose yoga, Chair yoga, Yoga poses ...
Chair Hip Opening And Strength Flow Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits ...
Chair Seated Twists Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits, Variations, and Sanskrit ...
5 Best Yoga Ball Chair for Homes and Offices (2021 Buying Guide) - Learn ...
Chair Yoga for Seniors: 8 Chair Yoga Poses Seniors Can Do Easily At Home ...
Fig. 2. Example ranking result showing top-5 ranked documents with predicted relevance scores for the
query “can you do yoga from a chair ”. Query and Documents are selected from TREC-DL (2021) [28]
and MS MARCO [86], respectively.
decision-tree path and the well-established IR principles (axioms). On the other hand, a soft-rule
refers to those that partially impact the model decision.
2.2 Post-hoc Interpretability
Post-hoc interpretability methods explain the decisions of already trained machine learning models.
Post-hoc approaches are either model-agnostic (black-box) where the interpretability approach has
no access to the trained model parameters [77, 102], or model introspective (white-box) which have
full access to the parameters of the underlying model [110, 120] or data [64]. In this survey, we will
review approaches for both white-box and black-box settings. Moreover, specifically in IR, we make
a distinction between a strongly- and weakly-agnostic setting depending on if we are provided
only access to a ranking of documents or also the score of a document given a query. Most of the
work in the existing literature only considers our definition of a weakly agnostic model.
2.2.1 Methods of post-hoc interpretability. A dominant class of post-hoc explanation approaches
output what is known as feature attributions or saliency maps. Most of the white-box approaches
adapt gradient-based attribution approaches with task-specific calibrations. For black-box approaches, explanation methods use words/sentences/passages in text retrieval and ranking, and
numeric and categorical features in LTR for modeling the feature space. We discuss methods in
detail about feature attribution in Section 3, free-text explanations in Section 4, and adversarial
examples in Section 5.
2.3 Interpretability by Design
A common problem with post-hoc approaches is that it is often unclear how much the model
behavior is indeed understood. In fact, Rudin [106] advocates using Interpretable-by-design (IBD)
models as much as possible specifically for high-stakes decision-making. However, building an
IBD model that is indeed fully transparent and meanwhile maintaining competitive performance is
challenging, especially for complex non-linear and over-parameterized neural models. We note
that most proposals in literature are partially interpretable, instead of exhibiting full transparency.
2.3.1 Explainable by Architecture vs Rationales. Many approaches brand themselves as IBD methods,
when in fact they are partially interpretable. On one hand, some methods have only interpretable
feature interactions and score compositions [42, 63]. On the other hand, methods choose extractive
input sequences as explanations while the models themselves are non-interpretable [70, 146]. In
this survey, we firstly subdivide the family of IBD approaches by explainable by architecture (cf.
Section 8) where components of the model architecture are partially or fully interpretable. Secondly,
IBD methods that enforce input feature sparsity are detailed in Section 9 asrationale-based methods.
