Method Task Components Explanation Dataset Evaluation
Colbert [63] Text Ranking Interaction Soft-rule MS MARCO -
Transformer-Kernel [54] Text Ranking Interaction Soft-rule MS MARCO Anecdotal
NeuralModel1 [15] Text Ranking Interaction Soft-rule MS MARCO Anecdotal
NeuralGAM [149] LTR Input Feature Attr. Yahoo Reference
ILMART [75] LTR Fully Hard-rule Yahoo Anecdotal
Table 5. Explainable-by-architecture Methods. Components indicate which component of the model architecture is explainable. Note that Colbert did not discuss or evaluate explainability. More similar datasets are
used in each paper, and we choose one as representative.
9 RATIONALE-BASED METHODS
The second class of IBD methods deals to enhance the interpretability of IR models by generating
rationales as an intermediate sparse input representation (see Figure 9). A rationale is defined as an
extractive piece of the input text that is responsible for the decision of the model. A rationale-based
method performs the task prediction two-stage. In the first feature-extraction phase, a model learns
to extract the rationale from the input text. In the subsequent prediction phase, another independent
task model predicts the task output solely based on the extractive explanation. Note that in such
a setup, each prediction can be unambiguously attributed to the generated rationale that is both
human-understandable and acts as an explanation. Examples of rationales are provided below in
Figure 10.
ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
1
2
9.37
9.34
10 Yoga Poses You Can Do in a Chair | Chair pose yoga, Chair yoga, Yoga poses ...
Chair Hip Opening And Strength Flow Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits ...
Fig. 10. Example of a binary rationale selection. First, a subset of tokens is selected. Then, a prediction is
made based on the selected rationale tokens. Selected rationales are highlighted in orange.
We summarize the approaches in this section in Table 6. The feature extraction stage in rationalebased models is sometimes called the selection or rationale-generation stage [70, 146]. The major
challenge in rationale-based methods is training the rationale-extraction module due to the discrete
rationale output of this stage. There are essentially two types of rationale-based methods based on
the optimization styles – pipeline or end-to-end.
9.1 Pipeline Approaches
A rationale-based model is a pipeline model if the rationale-extraction module is trained separately
from the task prediction module. Most pipeline methods require the presence of human-annotated,
extractive rationale data to train the rationale-extraction network. The first pipeline model was
proposed by Lehman et al . [68]. Their approach was proposed for the analysis of clinical trial
reports, where the aim is to predict whether the clinical trial causes a significant effect compared
with the control group. The reports are themselves annotated by human experts, where experts do
annotate not only the significance of the trial but also the snippet of the reports as the rationale
supporting such prediction. This constitutes the training data for the rationale-extraction module.
