Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 7
and Anand [112] propose EXS, an explainable search system that provides explanations to users
through feature attribution. Specifically, EXS aims to provide information on three questions: 1)
Why is a document relevant to the query, 2) Why is a document ranked higher than another
document, and 3) What the intent of the query is according to the ranker? LIME is designed to
explain the output of a classifier, and EXS casts the output of a pointwise ranker into a classification
problem by transforming query-document scores into class probabilities. A binary classification
problem is created by considering the top-𝑘 documents in an input ranking as relevant and the rest
as irrelevant, essentially considering document ranking as a classification problem where the black
box ranker is considered as a classifier. Polley et al. [91] compare EXS with their evidence-based
explainable document search system, ExDocS, which performs reranking using interpretable fea-
tures. In a user study, they found that EXS is on par with the ExDocS system in completeness and
transparency metrics, although users rated ExDocS as more interpretable compared to EXS. At the
same time, the use of ExDocS resulted in a drop in ranking performance, whereas the use of EXS
does not affect performance at all.
Similarly, Verma and Ganguly[125] adapt LIME to create locally interpretable ranking model
explanations (LIRME). In contrast to EXS, LIRME trains the local surrogate model directly on
the query-document scores and does not transform them into class probabilities. Instead, they
experiment with different strategies to sample documents in the neighborhood of the document
to be explained. In their experiments, they create explanations for the output of a Jelinek-Mercer
smoothed language model on the TREC-8 dataset and find that uniform or TF-IDF-biased term
replacement strategies produce better explanations than replacement strategies that use term
position information.
Instead of training a local surrogate model to generate explanations for individual examples,
Singh and Anand [111] distill an already trained black-box LTR model into an interpretable global
surrogate model that is used to generate explanations. This global surrogate model only operates on
the interpretable subset of features and is trained to mimic the predictions of the black-box ranker.
For training, they create numerous artificial training examples In their experiments, they validate
whether it is possible to train an interpretable model that approximates a complex model. On the
LTR datasets [96] they find that a faithful interpretable ranker can only be learned for certain query
localities. This showcases the limitation that simple models, even when trained with a much larger
quantity of training data, are not able to faithfully explain all localities of the decision boundary of
a complex model and that using local surrogate models can be advantageous.
3.1.3 Searching for Explanations. An alternative to the above approaches is to search the space of all
possible explanations, optimizing for a metric of choice. For LTR models, Singh et al. [115] propose
a simple, yet effective greedy search-based approach to find explanations. Their approach aims
to find a subset of explanatory features that maximizes two measures, validity and completeness.
The validity of an explanation is defined as the amount of predictive capacity contained in a subset
of explanatory features. The idea is that the explanatory features should be sufficient to produce
the original output ranking. In fact, this measure aligns with the sufficiency metric introduced
by DeYoung et al. [31]. The completeness metric measures whether removing explanatory features
from the input significantly changes the output. When all explanatory features are removed, it
should not be possible to produce the original output ranking. Kendall’s tau rank correlation
measures differences in output rankings; the underlying model is treated as a black-box.
Pre-print