Table 8: Results on the Alternative Splicing Data Set.
Method | Code Quality | (bits)
Neural Network (early stopping) (Xiong et al., 2011) | 440 |
Regression, PCA (Xiong et al., 2011) | 463 |
SVM, PCA (Xiong et al., 2011) | 487 |
Neural Network with dropout | 567 |
Bayesian Neural Network (Xiong et al., 2011) | 623 |

Table 8 summarizes the performance of different models on this data set. Xiong et al. (2011) used Bayesian neural nets for this task. As expected, we found that Bayesian neural nets perform better than dropout. However, we see that dropout improves significantly upon the performance of standard neural nets and outperforms all other methods. The challenge in this data set is to prevent overfitting since the size of the training set is small. One way to prevent overfitting is to reduce the input dimensionality using PCA. Thereafter, standard techniques such as SVMs or logistic regression can be used. However, with dropout we were able to prevent overfitting without the need to do dimensionality reduction. The dropout nets are very large (1000s of hidden units) compared to a few tens of units in the Bayesian network. This shows that dropout has a strong regularizing effect.

6.5 Comparison with Standard Regularizers

Several regularization methods have been proposed for preventing overfitting in neural networks. These include L2 weight decay (more generally Tikhonov regularization (Tikhonov, 1943)), lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), KL-sparsity and max-norm regularization. Dropout can be seen as another way of regularizing neural networks. In this section we compare dropout with some of these regularization methods using the MNIST data set.

The same network architecture (784-1024-1024-2048-10) with ReLUs was trained using stochastic gradient descent with different regularizations. Table 9 shows the results. The values of different hyperparameters associated with each kind of regularization (decay constants, target sparsity, dropout rate, max-norm upper bound) were obtained using a validation set. We found that dropout combined with max-norm regularization gives the lowest generalization error.

7. Salient Features

The experiments described in the previous section provide strong evidence that dropout is a useful technique for improving neural networks. In this section, we closely examine how dropout affects a neural network. We analyze the effect of dropout on the quality of features produced. We see how dropout affects the sparsity of hidden unit activations. We also see how the advantages obtained from dropout vary with the probability of retaining units, size of the network and the size of the training set. These observations give some insight into why dropout works so well.