Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 21
relevance decision is learned via a neural layer, making the Transformer-Kernel less interpretable
in comparison to Colbert and NeuralModel1.
8.2 Explainable Learning-to-Rank
For LTR task dealing with smaller numerical input features, there are works relying on explicitly
aggregating feature contribution for relevance measurement, or a fully transparent tree model . The
goal of LTR is to predict a relevance score for a fixed-size input vector. Because of the smaller and
structured input features, it is more practical to build a transparent model in input space or the
entire decision path. In the following paragraphs, we introduce one LTR model with explicit feature
contribution and one transparent decision-tree model incorporated with reduced input space.
8.2.1 Explicit Feature Contribution. Different from the previously discussed feature-attribution
methods, explicit feature contribution indicates a simple and transparent correlation between each
input feature and the relevance prediction, in addition to showing importance heatmaps.
NeuralGAM [149] is based on Generalized Additive Models (GAMs). For each individual feature,
NeuralGAM employs an isolated black-box (e.g., neural networks) model to generate a score
indicating the contribution (or importance) of the feature. The relevance of the input is aggregated
by simply summing up all contribution scores. NeuralGAM is explainable in terms of feature
contribution, as the relevance is aggregated from the feature importance score directly by a simple
sum operation. Nevertheless, it remains opaque how each feature importance score is generated by
the black-box model.
8.2.2 Explainable Tree Models. The main challenge of interpreting tree models is the over-complex
decision path caused by the massive number of features and their interactions. Thus, an explainable
tree model should have a limited number of features and interactions and, in turn, be able to provide
a simple and understandable decision-making path.
ILMART [75] shares a similar structure as GAM, while using LambdaMART as the sub-model.
ILMART starts from learning a set of trees, with each dealing with one single distinct feature only.
This step enables ILMART to identify a small yet crucial set of features and exclude the rest. Then,
ILMART enforces a new ensemble of trees to explore the interactions between every two remaining
features only. This design can effectively reduce the model’s complexity. Finally, ILMART combines
trees from the previous two steps and learns a much smaller and simpler ensemble-tree model with
the input space hugely reduced.
8.3 Evaluation
A key attribute of interpretable models is, it does not just highlight the importance of input
snippets/dimensions (e.g., tokens in a query or document), but also suggest why those snippets
lead to the decision. Namely, a set of rules can be implicitly inferred from the explanations, even
when only the input features are presented. This is the usual case when the audience group of
explanation is system developers or domain experts. One explanation example for Colbert can be
a small set of tokens in the query and document, together with their cosine similarity degree. We
denote this type of explanation as soft-rule, to distinguish from the hard-rule of an explicit path in
a tree model. NeuralGAM presents feature attribution scores (similar to Section 3) as explanations
and moreover, the relevance decision can be explicitly induced from the scores.
Except for Colbert, all methods evaluate the goodness of explanations by showing anecdotal
examples. Additionally, NeuralGAM compares the features to a referenced tree-model, and justifies
the faithfulness of explanations by a similar trend. A summary of methods can be found in Table 5.
Pre-print