Table 7: Phone error rate on the TIMIT core test set.
Method | Phone Error
NN (6 layers) (Mohamed et al., 2010) | 23.4
Dropout NN (6 layers) | 21.8
DBN-pretrained NN (4 layers) | 22.7
DBN-pretrained NN (6 layers) (Mohamed et al., 2010) | 22.4
DBN-pretrained NN (8 layers) (Mohamed et al., 2010) | 20.7
mcRBM-DBN-pretrained NN (5 layers) (Dahl et al., 2010) | 20.5
DBN-pretrained NN (4 layers) + dropout | 19.7
DBN-pretrained NN (8 layers) + dropout | 19.7

6.3 Results on a Text Data Set

To test the usefulness of dropout in the text domain, we used dropout networks to train a document classifier. We used a subset of the Reuters-RCV1 data set which is a collection of over 800,000 newswire articles from Reuters. These articles cover a variety of topics. The task is to take a bag of words representation of a document and classify it into 50 disjoint topics. Appendix B.5 describes the setup in more detail. Our best neural net which did not use dropout obtained an error rate of 31 . 05%. Adding dropout reduced the error to 29 . 62%. We found that the improvement was much smaller compared to that for the vision and speech data sets.

6.4 Comparison with Bayesian Neural Networks

Dropout can be seen as a way of doing an equally-weighted averaging of exponentially many models with shared weights. On the other hand, Bayesian neural networks (Neal, 1996) are the proper way of doing model averaging over the space of neural network structures and parameters. In dropout, each model is weighted equally, whereas in a Bayesian neural network each model is weighted taking into account the prior and how well the model fits the data, which is the more correct approach. Bayesian neural nets are extremely useful for solving problems in domains where data is scarce such as medical diagnosis, genetics, drug discovery and other computational biology applications. However, Bayesian neural nets are slow to train and difficult to scale to very large network sizes. Besides, it is expensive to get predictions from many large nets at test time. On the other hand, dropout neural nets are much faster to train and use at test time. In this section, we report experiments that compare Bayesian neural nets with dropout neural nets on a small data set where Bayesian neural networks are known to perform well and obtain state-of-the-art results. The aim is to analyze how much does dropout lose compared to Bayesian neural nets.

The data set that we use (Xiong et al., 2011) comes from the domain of genetics. The task is to predict the occurrence of alternative splicing based on RNA features. Alternative splicing is a significant cause of cellular diversity in mammalian tissues. Predicting the occurrence of alternate splicing in certain tissues under different conditions is important for understanding many human diseases. Given the RNA features, the task is to predict the probability of three splicing related events that biologists care about. The evaluation metric is Code Quality which is a measure of the negative KL divergence between the target and the predicted probability distributions (higher is better). Appendix B.6 includes a detailed description of the data set and this performance metric.