Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 5
2.4 Grounding to Information Retrieval Principles
There is a long-standing history of building text ranking models in IR. Most of the well-known and
robust approaches for understanding relevance are based on establishing closed-formed relevance
equations based on probabilistic [92] or axiomatic foundations [16]. A possible improve way to
improve the transparency of data-driven complex ML models is to determine if the learned models
adhere to well-understood IR principles. Towards this, there are two streams of research efforts
that attempt to ground the predictions of learned ranking models into axioms or probing models
for known relevance factors of matching, term proximity, and semantic similarity. We review these
approaches in Sections 6 and 7. Note that the methods utilizing IR principles can be implemented
in both post-hoc and IBD manner.
2.5 Evaluation of Explanations
Evaluation of interpretability or explainability approaches has long been an arduous and challenging
task. There is no agreed-upon set of experimental protocols leading to various design decisions due
to a lack of ground truths and differences in the perceived utility, stakeholders, and forms. Doshi-
Velez and Kim [32] classify evaluation approaches as application-grounded, human-grounded, and
functionality-grounded. The difference between application- and human-grounded evaluations is
using experts and non-experts as evaluation subjects. Functionality-grounded evaluation does not
involve humans and relies on a closed-form definition of interpretability that serves as a proxy to
evaluate the explanation quality. We introduce the following three classes of evaluation strategies
employed in ExIR.
2.5.1 Human evaluation. Most current papers in ExIR involve human evaluation, but primarily do
not differentiate between expert- and non-expert users. Evaluations can be simply anecdotal. In
this case, example explanations are shown to users, and typically binary judgments regarding the
goodness of the explanations are elicited. A surprising number of ExIR papers claim interpretability
of their approaches but conduct simple anecdotal experiments. A more fine-grained human evalua-
tion is to ask users to solve specific tasks with the assistance of explanations. Such an approach
evaluates the utility of the explanations or answers the question – how helpful are the explanations
in the context of a given application?
2.5.2 Fidelity-based Evaluation. Fidelity measures to which degree the explanations can replicate
the underlying model decisions. Fidelity is measured by generating a second prediction and com-
puting the agreement between the actual and the generated prediction. The second prediction could
be derived from either 1) using a part of the input, 2) using a surrogate model, or 3) generating
a counterfactual or adversarial example. A more fine-grained category of fidelity can include
evaluating the comprehensiveness, sufficiency, etc. We will further discuss the detailed metrics when
we come to specific methods.
2.5.3 Reference-based Evaluation. The lack of ground truths for explanations is a central problem
in explainable AI. Whenever the ground-truth explanations are available, we can use them as the
reference to compare with the generated explanations. In case of a lack of ground truth explanations,
some methods choose a well-understood and fully explainable/transparent model as a reference
model. In such cases, we can evaluate the truthfulness of the explanation methods by comparing
the explanations generated by the reference model and the explanation method.
3 FEATURE ATTRIBUTION
Feature attribution methods, also known as feature importance or saliency methods, typically
generate explanations for individual predictions by attributing the model output to the input
Pre-print