Table 10: Comparison of classification error % with Bernoulli and Gaussian dropout. For MNIST, the Bernoulli model uses p = 0 . 5 for the hidden units and p = 0 . 8 for the input units. For CIFAR-10, we use p = (0 . 9 , 0 . 75 , 0 . 75 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 5) going from the input layer to the top. The value of σ for the Gaussian dropout models was set to be √ 1 -p p . Results were averaged over 10 different random seeds.
Data Set | Architecture | Bernoulli dropout | Gaussian dropout
MNIST | 2 layers, 1024 units each | 1.08 ± 0.04 | 0.95 ± 0.04
CIFAR-10 | 3 conv + 2 fully connected layers | 12.6 ± 0.1 | 12.5 ± 0.1

10. Multiplicative Gaussian Noise

Dropout involves multiplying hidden activations by Bernoulli distributed random variables which take the value 1 with probability p and 0 otherwise. This idea can be generalized by multiplying the activations with random variables drawn from other distributions. We recently discovered that multiplying by a random variable drawn from N (1 , 1) works just as well, or perhaps better than using Bernoulli noise. This new form of dropout amounts to adding a Gaussian distributed random variable with zero mean and standard deviation equal to the activation of the unit. That is, each hidden activation h i is perturbed to h i + h i r where r ∼ N (0 , 1), or equivalently h i r ′ where r ′ ∼ N (1 , 1). We can generalize this to r ′ ∼ N (1 , σ 2 ) where σ becomes an additional hyperparameter to tune, just like p was in the standard (Bernoulli) dropout. The expected value of the activations remains unchanged, therefore no weight scaling is required at test time.

In this paper, we described dropout as a method where we retain units with probability p at training time and scale down the weights by multiplying them by a factor of p at test time. Another way to achieve the same effect is to scale up the retained activations by multiplying by 1 /p at training time and not modifying the weights at test time. These methods are equivalent with appropriate scaling of the learning rate and weight initializations at each layer.

Therefore, dropout can be seen as multiplying h i by a Bernoulli random variable r b that takes the value 1 /p with probability p and 0 otherwise. E [ r b ] = 1 and V ar [ r b ] = (1 -p ) /p . For the Gaussian multiplicative noise, if we set σ 2 = (1 -p ) /p , we end up multiplying h i by a random variable r g , where E [ r g ] = 1 and V ar [ r g ] = (1 -p ) /p . Therefore, both forms of dropout can be set up so that the random variable being multiplied by has the same mean and variance. However, given these first and second order moments, r g has the highest entropy and r b has the lowest. Both these extremes work well, although preliminary experimental results shown in Table 10 suggest that the high entropy case might work slightly better. For each layer, the value of σ in the Gaussian model was set to be √ 1 -p p using the p from the corresponding layer in the Bernoulli model.

11. Conclusion

Dropout is a technique for improving neural networks by reducing overfitting. Standard backpropagation learning builds up brittle co-adaptations that work for the training data but do not generalize to unseen data. Random dropout breaks up these co-adaptations by making the presence of any particular hidden unit unreliable. This technique was found to improve the performance of neural nets in a wide variety of application domains including object classification, digit recognition, speech recognition, document classification and analysis of computational biology data. This suggests that dropout is a general technique and is not specific to any domain. Methods that use dropout achieve state-of-the-art results on SVHN, ImageNet, CIFAR-100 and MNIST. Dropout considerably improved the performance of standard neural nets on other data sets as well.