where ¯ m is the inverse mask and 𝑃 (·) indicates the predicted probability. The sufficiency is defined as the difference between the full-input prediction and the prediction based on the rationale-only tokens, i.e.:

Furthermore, Bang et al. [5] evaluate their information-bottleneck model with the fidelity of the rationales. They define the fidelity similar to the sufficiency score introduced above, i.e., to answer how well does the rationale-based prediction match the prediction on the full input?

10 LIMITATIONS AND OPEN QUESTIONS

In this section, we will discuss the limitations, challenges, and open questions in the area of explainable information retrieval. We have reviewed many interpretability methods and approaches that cover various aspects and tasks in IR. However, there are many unanswered questions, use cases, and scenarios that need further research. We feel that most interpretability approaches have focussed on the functional aspect of the central IR tasks of ranking items. There are, however, many more IR tasks that employ learning systems. Similarly, an IR system has different stakeholders most prominently, the benefactor of the IR system is the user, but much of the work has focused on the system developer as the most likely stakeholder. Finally, most of the explanation methods have relied on feature attributions as the dominant type of explanations. However, explanations can be in terms of training instances, adversarial examples, rules, etc.

10.1 Limitations

There are multiple limitations and challenges in facilitating and developing interpretable approaches for information retrieval tasks. For the common task of document retrieval, we discussed early heard that we require listwise or pairwise explanations instead of pointwise explanations.

10.1.1 Limiting Assumptions. The underlying assumption for surrogate models is that a simple model can locally approximate the behavior of a complex black-box ranker. However, the ranked output from a complex retrieval model can involve multiple relevance factors. While one document in the ranking might rely on term matching with the query, another document in the same ranking might be deemed relevant by the same ranking model due to the proximity of query terms in the document. Therefore, rankings with multiple and sometimes conflicting relevance factors for a single simple surrogate model might not be able to provide high fidelity.

10.1.2 Disentangling Explanations. Many of the feature attribution methods provide one explanation, but complex machine learning models learn multiple features for the same behavior, which are also difficult to disentangle. This problem is exaggerated when it is coupled with the problem of correlated reasons. Specifically, many relevance factors are known to be correlated. A document that exhibits high semantic similarity with the query might also have a high term-level matching score. In these cases, it is likely that the methods covered in this survey (for example, probing approaches) will not be able to disentangle the effects of the underlying relevant factors from each other.