2 Avishek Anand, Lijun Lyu, Maximilian Idahl, Yumeng Wang, Jonas Wallat, and Zijian Zhang
Explainable IR
Post-hoc
Feature
Attribution §3
Free-text
Explanations §4
Adversarial
Examples §5
Grounding to IR Properties
Axiomatic
Analysis §6
Probing §7
Interpretable by-design
Explainable
Architectures §8
Rationale-based
Methods §9
Fig. 1. Categorization of explainable IR approaches, where § indicates the section the approach is discussed.
has quite a diverse landscape owing to the continued and sustained interest in the last few years.
The initial approaches in ExIR were adaptations of widely popular feature-attribution approaches
(e.g., LIME [102] and SHAP’s [76]). However, in the following years, there has been a multitude
of approaches that tackle specific problems in IR. We cover a wide range of approaches, from
post-hoc approaches (cf. Sections 3, 4 and 5), grounding to axiomatic approaches (cf. Section 6), to
interpretable-by-design methods (cf. Section 8 and Section 9).
1.3 Methodology and Scope
Before we started our literature review, we needed to collect a corpus of relevant papers for ExIR
and delineate the boundaries of the review.
1.3.1 Corpus Creation. We started with very first works in ExIR (e.g., [29, 112, 113]), to build up an
initial pool of papers. We did then forward search from this initial set of papers that mention terms
“(explain* OR interpretab* OR explanation* OR transparen*)” AND “(retriev* OR rank*”. Secondly, we
limited our search to articles published in the past five years (2018 – 2022) to provide a representative
window into current best practices that have emerged since the inception of the earliest works in
ExIR in the following IR venues – ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR),
International Conference on the Theory of Information Retrieval (ICTIR), International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining(WSDM), Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), the ACM Web Conference (TheWebConf). In total, after filtering, we ended up with 68
papers that we consider in this review that are partially relevant. A subset of 32 papers of those
partially relevant papers find more detailed treatment in this survey.
1.3.2 Scope. We note that many of the methods in ExIR have methodological overlap with those
invented in ML, natural language processing (NLP), and recommender systems (RS) communities. In
fact, most of the approaches in ExIR are based on seminal papers in these communities. We only focus
on core-IR issues in this survey and, wherever possible, clearly spell out the distinctions from similar
approaches in NLP, RS and ML in general. Rationale-based models have been heavily investigated
in NLP. We cover only the methods popularized in IR-centric or venues. Our survey focuses on
rationale-based models, i.e., document-ranking tasks, in learning-to-rank (LTR), and tasks that rely
on a retrieval component. Also, RS have a lot of work and even surveys in explainability [ 145].
We only survey those approaches that are useful for query modeling in query-based systems. The
papers on the topics of personalization search or explainable RS, although they can be considered as
user modeling applications of ExIR, were not selected due to either lack of specific interpretability
methods or being more suitable to be classified into a relatively independent field of study. We also
exclude IR approaches dealing with image or multi-modal data.
Pre-print