6 Avishek Anand, Lijun Lyu, Maximilian Idahl, Yumeng Wang, Jonas Wallat, and Zijian Zhang
features. A scalar representing the importance is assigned to each input feature or groups of input
features. These scores are then commonly visualized using a heatmap or a bar chart, informing
the user about which features the model’s prediction is most sensitive to. Figure 3 demonstrates
example feature attributions for the top-2 ranked documents, following the example from Figure 2.
Feature attribution methods have been found to be the most popular explanation technique and
ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
1
2
9.37
9.34
10 Yoga Poses You Can Do in a Chair | Chair pose yoga, Chair yoga, Yoga poses ...
Chair Hip Opening And Strength Flow Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits ...
Fig. 3. A fictive example using a heatmap to visualize feature attributions for the top-2 ranked documents for
the query “can you do yoga from a chair ”. Feature importance is highlighted in orange.
are used in many domains [11]. However, as is common for interpretation techniques, most feature
attribution methods were originally designed to explain the predictions of classification models.
Recent work explores how such methods can be applied or adapted to explain the output of
ranking models, where feature importance scores can be computed for the query or document
input individually, or for both, as shown in Figure 3. Following our categorization (Section 2), we
differentiate between model-agnostic and model-introspective feature attribution methods.
3.1 Model-agnostic Feature Attribution
A variety of feature attribution methods generate explanations in a model-agnostic way by perturb-
ing input features and observing the change in the model output. The underlying model is treated
as a black box.
3.1.1 Feature Ablation. Feature ablation is a simple perturbation-based approach to computing
importance scores. Individual (or groups of) input features are removed one at a time, and an
importance score is assigned based on the observed difference between the model predictions.
To interpret a BERT-based ranking model, Qiao et al. [95] compute the importance of tokens
through feature ablation. To produce feature importance scores, they compare the ranking score of
an unmodified document with the ranking score for the same document when removing a randomly
chosen input token. Specifically, they only remove input tokens corresponding to regular words
and keep all tokens that are special tokens or correspond to stopwords. They find that the ranking
score produced by a BERT model depends on only a few tokens in each document. The ranking
score often decreases significantly when these tokens are removed. When manually examining the
important tokens, the authors find that they often correspond to exact match terms, i.e., terms that
also appear in the input query, and terms in close semantic context. In contrast, when examining
token importance scores for a neural ranker based on convolutions and interactions [ 30] that
soft-matches n-grams for ad-hoc search, the most important terms appear to be rather loosely
related to the input query.
3.1.2 Surrogate Models. Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [102] is an in-
terpretability method that generates explanations by training a surrogate model on a dataset of
perturbed samples to locally approximate the behavior of the underlying black-box model. Typically,
a linear model, preferably sparse, is chosen as the interpretable surrogate model since the weights
directly specify the importance of each feature. Using LIME to generate feature attributions, Singh
Pre-print