Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 15
Paper Task Approach Dataset Evaluation
Hagen et al. [47] LTR IBD TREC Web tracks 2009-2014 -
Rennings et al. [101] Text Ranking Post-hoc WikiPassageQA -
Câmara and Hauff [19] Text Ranking Post-hoc TREC 2019 DL -
Völske et al. [128] Text Ranking Post-hoc Robust04, MS MARCO Fidelity
Rosset et al. [104] Text Ranking Regularization MS MARCO -
Cheng and Fang [26] Text Ranking Regularization WikiQA, MS MARCO -
Chen et al. [24] Text Ranking Regularization MS MARCO, TREC 2019 DL Anecdotal
Table 3. Classification of axiomatic methods. The evaluation w.r.t. interpretability can be anecdotal or intrin-
sically measured by a corresponding faithfulness measure.
6.1 Interpretable Axiomatic Rankers
Hagen et al. [47]is one of the first to operationalize retrieval axioms to perform axiomatic re-ranking.
By learning the importance of individual axioms, they aggregate the axioms’ partial orderings.
Despite being inherently more interpretable, they evaluate their axiomatic re-ranking step with a
selection of retrieval models, showing that for most of them the performance significantly increases.
Given that the axioms and the aggregation method are fully interpretable, the resulting re-ranking
is also fully interpretable. Bondarenko et al. [14] proposed a utility library called ir_axioms that
allows experimenting with a collection of 25 different axioms and allows one to add new axioms.
This library can be used for axiomatic result re-ranking and diagnostic experiments to explain
neural ranking models.
6.2 Axioms for Model Diagnostics
More directly related to the classical post-hoc interpretability work is a line of recent works
diagnosing and explaining ranking models using axioms. Rennings et al. [101]constructed diagnostic
datasets based on existing axioms and checked whether classical neural ranking models are in
agreement with the axiomatic rules. They find that out-of-the-box neural rankers conform with the
axiomatic rankings to only a limited extent. However, they hypothesize that including diagnostic
datasets in the training process could boost this conformity. Câmara and Hauff[19] extend this work
and apply diagnostic datasets similarly to ad-hoc retrieval with BERT. They find thatBERT does
not align with most of the ranking axioms but significantly outperforms other neural and classical
approaches. The authors conclude that the current set of axioms is insufficient to understand BERT’s
notion of relevance. Last in this line of work is an approach to produce axiomatic explanations for
neural ranking models by Völske et al. [128]. Similar to existing work on axiomatic re-ranking [47]
and diagnosing neural rankers [ 19, 101], this study investigates whether neural rankings can
be explained by the combination of existing axioms. To do so, they train a small random forest
explanation model on the axioms’ partial orderings to reconstruct the ranking list produced by the
neural ranking model. They find that axiomatic explanations work well in cases where the ranking
models are confident in their relevance estimation. However, these explanations fail for pairs with
similar retrieval scores and conclude that more axioms are needed to close this gap.
6.3 Axioms for Regularizing Neural Rankers
Recently, a variety of approaches foraxiomatic regularization of neural ranking models has been pro-
posed [24, 26, 104]. These approaches aim to regularize opaque neural rankers to incentivize learning
Pre-print