26 Avishek Anand, Lijun Lyu, Maximilian Idahl, Yumeng Wang, Jonas Wallat, and Zijian Zhang
10.2 Open Questions
Now we turn to some of the open questions in the area of explainable information retrieval. We
divide the questions into three main categories - types of explanations, explaining user models,
evaluation of explanations, causal explanations and the utility of explanations.
10.2.1 Explanation by Example. As discussed before, most of the explanation methods have been
limited to explaining the feature space – words, sentences, or numerical features in learning to rank
tasks. Prominent among these are attribution methods and hard masking techniques. However,
data attribution or instance attributes and methods have not been explored in the context of
information retrieval tasks. Current papers that deal with explanation by examples are limited to
finding adversarial examples of generated text documents that result in errors of contextual rankers.
Instance attribution methods attribute the rationale or reason behind the prediction back to the
input instances in the training data. Examples of instance attribution methods include influence
functions and data poisoning methods. The interpretability question that instance attribution
method methods answer is which of the input instances in the training data is responsible for
training the model in a certain way to cause the following decision.
For a document retrieval task, the interpretability question could be “which of the queries in
the training set affect a certain test query ?”. The output of instance attribution tasks can result in
isolating mislabelled training instances, identifying dataset biases, and providing insights into query
representation of the complex encoders. Other types of explanations can be generated explanations
for the stakeholders who are end users. These generative explanations can take the form of fully-
fledged natural language that is composed of extractive explanations, feature attributions, or even
instance attribution methods.
10.2.2 Explaining User Models. Personalized ranking models tailor the search result list according
to a user’s profile as inferred by the search engine. While it is useful, modern personalization
techniques cause growing anxiety in their users – “Why am I seeing these search results? What
does the search engine believe my interests are?”
Search engines have recently come under increased scrutiny due to their influence on people’s
decision-making in critical scenarios such as health and elections. Search personalization typically
involves tailoring the ranking of results for individual users based on models of their past preferences
and interests. Consequently, there is a growing concern in users due to the possible negative effects
of personalization that include bias [ 50, 84], filter bubbles [41, 48, 88] and increased opacity of
the ranking mechanism. Modern personalization techniques are based on learning an effective
representation of a user by mining sensitive behavioral data like click-throughs [62], query logs [21]
and topical interests [51] from social media. Given today’s landscape of partisan news coupled with
the fact that commercial search engines do not highlight personalized results, there is a real need
to help us better understand what a search engine infers about its users. Specifically, an interesting
interpretability question to ask is what does the search engine perceive the user as when they issue a
certain query? This manner of post-hoc auditing of retrieval models can be useful in a variety of
downstream bias detection and validation applications.
10.2.3 Evaluation of Explanations. Evaluation of explanations is a general problem in the area
of interpretable machine learning. There is a large spectrum of evaluation methods, starting
from functionally grounded evaluations to Human-centered evaluation in the wider domain of
machine learning and natural language processing. However, in information retrieval, most of the
explanation evaluation techniques have focused on functionally grounded evaluation. Approaches
that we reviewed in this paper propose and evaluate explanation methods by their fidelity, validity,
completeness, and human congruence. We refer to these methods as intrinsic methods.
Pre-print