9.1 Linear Regression

First we explore a very simple case of applying dropout to the classical problem of linear regression. Let X ∈ R N × D be a data matrix of N data points. y ∈ R N be a vector of targets. Linear regression tries to find a w ∈ R D that minimizes

When the input X is dropped out such that any input dimension is retained with probability p , the input can be expressed as R ∗ X where R ∈ { 0 , 1 } N × D is a random matrix with R ij ∼ Bernoulli( p ) and ∗ denotes an element-wise product. Marginalizing the noise, the objective function becomes

This reduces to

where Γ = (diag( X ⊤ X )) 1 / 2 . Therefore, dropout with linear regression is equivalent, in expectation, to ridge regression with a particular form for Γ. This form of Γ essentially scales the weight cost for weight w i by the standard deviation of the i th dimension of the data. If a particular data dimension varies a lot, the regularizer tries to squeeze its weight more.

Another interesting way to look at this objective is to absorb the factor of p into w . This leads to the following form

where ˜ w = p w . This makes the dependence of the regularization constant on p explicit. For p close to 1, all the inputs are retained and the regularization constant is small. As more dropout is done (by decreasing p ), the regularization constant grows larger.

9.2 Logistic Regression and Deep Networks

For logistic regression and deep neural nets, it is hard to obtain a closed form marginalized model. However, Wang and Manning (2013) showed that in the context of dropout applied to logistic regression, the corresponding marginalized model can be trained approximately. Under reasonable assumptions, the distributions over the inputs to the logistic unit and over the gradients of the marginalized model are Gaussian. Their means and variances can be computed efficiently. This approximate marginalization outperforms Monte-Carlo dropout in terms of training time and generalization performance.

However, the assumptions involved in this technique become successively weaker as more layers are added. Therefore, the results are not directly applicable to deep networks.