2. Motivation

A motivation for dropout comes from a theory of the role of sex in evolution (Livnat et al., 2010). Sexual reproduction involves taking half the genes of one parent and half of the other, adding a very small amount of random mutation, and combining them to produce an offspring. The asexual alternative is to create an offspring with a slightly mutated copy of the parent's genes. It seems plausible that asexual reproduction should be a better way to optimize individual fitness because a good set of genes that have come to work well together can be passed on directly to the offspring. On the other hand, sexual reproduction is likely to break up these co-adapted sets of genes, especially if these sets are large and, intuitively, this should decrease the fitness of organisms that have already evolved complicated coadaptations. However, sexual reproduction is the way most advanced organisms evolved.

One possible explanation for the superiority of sexual reproduction is that, over the long term, the criterion for natural selection may not be individual fitness but rather mix-ability of genes. The ability of a set of genes to be able to work well with another random set of genes makes them more robust. Since a gene cannot rely on a large set of partners to be present at all times, it must learn to do something useful on its own or in collaboration with a small number of other genes. According to this theory, the role of sexual reproduction is not just to allow useful new genes to spread throughout the population, but also to facilitate this process by reducing complex co-adaptations that would reduce the chance of a new gene improving the fitness of an individual. Similarly, each hidden unit in a neural network trained with dropout must learn to work with a randomly chosen sample of other units. This should make each hidden unit more robust and drive it towards creating useful features on its own without relying on other hidden units to correct its mistakes. However, the hidden units within a layer will still learn to do different things from each other. One might imagine that the net would become robust against dropout by making many copies of each hidden unit, but this is a poor solution for exactly the same reason as replica codes are a poor way to deal with a noisy channel.

A closely related, but slightly different motivation for dropout comes from thinking about successful conspiracies. Ten conspiracies each involving five people is probably a better way to create havoc than one big conspiracy that requires fifty people to all play their parts correctly. If conditions do not change and there is plenty of time for rehearsal, a big conspiracy can work well, but with non-stationary conditions, the smaller the conspiracy the greater its chance of still working. Complex co-adaptations can be trained to work well on a training set, but on novel test data they are far more likely to fail than multiple simpler co-adaptations that achieve the same thing.

3. Related Work

Dropout can be interpreted as a way of regularizing a neural network by adding noise to its hidden units. The idea of adding noise to the states of units has previously been used in the context of Denoising Autoencoders (DAEs) by Vincent et al. (2008, 2010) where noise is added to the input units of an autoencoder and the network is trained to reconstruct the noise-free input. Our work extends this idea by showing that dropout can be effectively applied in the hidden layers as well and that it can be interpreted as a form of model averaging. We also show that adding noise is not only useful for unsupervised feature learning but can also be extended to supervised learning problems. In fact, our method can be applied to other neuron-based architectures, for example, Boltzmann Machines. While 5% noise typically works best for DAEs, we found that our weight scaling procedure applied at test time enables us to use much higher noise levels. Dropping out 20% of the input units and 50% of the hidden units was often found to be optimal.