9.2 End-to-End Approaches

As its name suggests, we can train both the task and the rationale-generation module jointly using the gradients from the task supervision signal. The major technical challenge in this setting is that of gradient estimation for the rationale generation parameters. Lei et al. [69] is the first work that proposes an end-to-end approach for the problem of rationale-based models in the context of vanilla text classification. The rationale extraction module parameterizes a per-token distribution of relevance. The output of this layer is a hard binary mask as rationales. The parameters of this module are optimized by estimated gradients, using a REINFORCE-style algorithm. Additionally, they also applied constraints like the continuity of the selected rationales and the sparsity of the rationales to further enhance the sparsity. Extensions of this approach include [68] and [6] that also focus on text classification, albeit using reparameterization trick for better numerical stability and convergence rate when training the rationale-extractor.

The first work to propose end-to-end methods for ranking tasks is [70]. Their approach is called select and rank and is based on the observation that only a few sentences in a related document are relevant given a query. In the rationale-selection phase, they first select relevant sentences from a document with respect to the query input. The selected rationales act as an extractive summary of the document. After that, only these rationales are used in the re-ranking phase with the query in a cross-encoder ranker. Both the selector and the rankers are trained end-to-end using a combination of the Gumbel-Softmax and reservoir sampling to ensure a user-specified 𝑘 -sentences to be sampled.

Unlike previous rationale-based models, Chen et al. [25] use a mutual-information-based formulation. Their theory is to select the rationales containing the most mutual information with the final prediction. Jiang et al. [61] and Bang et al. [5] further extend this information-theorybased approach by considering the information bottleneck (IB) as the rationale . Specifically, the information bottleneck T is an intermediate (usually latent) representation that maximizes the mutual information between T and the prediction Y , while its mutual information with the input X is minimized, i.e., I ( Y ; T ) -𝛽𝐼 ( X ; T ) , where 𝛽 is a hyper-parameter that balances both terms. Specifically, the information bottleneck can be seen as a rationale mask applied to the input, i.e. 𝑇 = m . The approach from Bang et al. [5] leverages the Gumbel-Softmax trick to sub-sample 𝑘 tokens as the rationale, while Jiang et al. [61]'s approach predicts the probability of being the rationale for each feature individually and obtain the rationale mask by rounding the probability.

9.3 Evaluation

Evaluation regimes to evaluate rationale-based models typically trade off task performance and the interpretability achieved. The desirable objective for these approaches is: a good IBD approach should provide a task-prediction model that performs at least no worse, if not better, than its non-explainable comparators, and delivers valuable rationales.

The quality of the rationales can be measured by the degree of their agreement with the groundtruth rationales. Essentially, they try to answer the interpretability question: To what degree do the rationales agree to what humans consider as true reasons? Benchmarks like [31] collect multiple human-annotated datasets in IR ranging from sentiment analysis, and fact-checking to entailment prediction. Therefore, given the human-annotated rationale data, one can also evaluate the rationales output by the rationale-extractor by calculating their similarity to the human annotations. The similarity metrics include but are not restricted to the accuracy , precision , recall , and F1 score of the rationale selection.

Apart from correspondence with human reasoning, DeYoung et al. [31] also introduces C/S scores, twoevaluation metrics that evaluate semantic attribution of selected rationales: 'comprehensiveness' and 'sufficiency'. For an arbitrary input x with its corresponding label 𝑙 on a fine-tuned model 𝑀 , the comprehensiveness of a rationale-selection mask m is defined as the difference between the model prediction made based on the whole input and on all-but-rationale tokens, i.e.: