Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 3
2 NOTIONS AND CATEGORIZATION
We start the survey by first introducing the notions and terminologies that are commonly used
in ExIR. Note that most of the terminologies in ExIR are adapted from the general area of inter-
pretable machine learning [82], explainable vision [107], natural language processing [117], and
recommendation systems [145]. We harmonize the differences in the categorizations used in these
areas to distill a specific method-centric classification of all approaches used in ExIR in Figure 1.
Our classification permeates the binary divides of post-hoc and interpretable-by-design approaches
by covering IR-specific dimensions of axiomatic characterization and free-text explanations.
2.1 Notions in Explainable Information Retrieval
Explanations are the outputs of an interpretable machine learning procedure or an interpretability
method. In general machine learning, explanations vary in scope and type. The scope of an explana-
tion can be a single instance or the entire dataset. The type of explanation refers to the style or
form of the explanation. Notions in ExIR share commonalities for the most part with general XAI.
However, there are some variations due to different tasks, inputs, and output types in IR. In the
following, we describe these IR-specific notions pertaining to explainability.
2.1.1 Local vs global interpretability. Local interpretability refers to per-instance interpretability.
For the task of document ranking, an individual query is usually considered as a single instance
even though multiple decisions might be involved (e.g., multiple query-document pairs and multiple
preference pairs). Specifically, local interpretability aims to explain the model decisions in the
locality of a specific query. On the other hand, global interpretability refers to the case when there
is no distinction across instances/queries in terms of model parameters, input spaces, etc.
2.1.2 Pointwise, Pairwise, Listwise. Ranking models output a ranked candidate list for a given
query. Therefore, the explanation of pointwise methods can only explain the models’ decision of a
single element in the list; while pairwise methods intend to explain the model’s preference of a
candidate pair. The explanation of listwise methods, however, aims to cover all individual decisions
in the entire ranking list.
2.1.3 Type of Explanations. A model decision can be explained differently in terms of input
features, training data, model parameters, or human-understandable decision structures. When
an explanation method measures the contribution of each feature in the input instance leading
to a specific decision, the generated explanation can be a feature attribution. On the one hand,
feature attributions can be soft masks, i.e., real numbers denoting feature importance. On the other
hand, they can also be presented as boolean or hard masks where a feature is either present or
absent in the explanation. An explanation is understandable to humans or users based not only
if the feature space is understandable but also if the explanation is small. An attribution over a
feature space of hundreds of dimensions is hard to interpret, even if it is over words and phrases
that are themselves understandable. In IR, we typically deal with long text documents, and using
feature attributions and sparsity is a key design criterion. Explanation procedures can enforce
sparsity constraints to have short extractive attributions or generate a small set of words or terms
called free-text explanation. Unlike feature-based explanations, explanations can be in terms of
input instances. Contrastive explanations are such types of explanations where the objective is to
generate example instances with minor differences from the input example but with contrasting
predictions. The value of contrastive examples as explanations is grounded in social sciences [81].
Therefore, using contrastive explanations to understand model behavior is one crucial aspect of
gaining more transparency into the model’s decision-making process. Finally, rules are also one of
the prevalent explanations. We denote the explicit decision-making rules ashard-rule, such as a
Pre-print