Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey
AVISHEK ANAND and LIJUN LYU,Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
MAXIMILIAN IDAHL, YUMENG WANG, JONAS WALLAT, and ZIJIAN ZHANG,L3S Research
Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany
Explainable information retrieval is an emerging research area aiming to make transparent and trustworthy
information retrieval systems. Given the increasing use of complex machine learning models in search systems,
explainability is essential in building and auditing responsible information retrieval models. This survey fills a
vital gap in the otherwise topically diverse literature of explainable information retrieval. It categorizes and
discusses recent explainability methods developed for different application domains in information retrieval,
providing a common framework and unifying perspectives. In addition, it reflects on the common concern of
evaluating explanations and highlights open challenges and opportunities.
1 INTRODUCTION
Information retrieval (IR) systems are one of the most user-centric systems on the Web, in digital
libraries, and enterprises. Search engines can be general-purpose (e.g., Web search) to specialized
expert systems that are geared towards expert consumption or support, including legal and patent
retrieval IR [22], historical search [55, 56], and scholarly search [49, 116]. On the one hand, riding
on the recent advances of complex machine learning (ML) models trained on large amounts of
data, IR has seen impressive performance gains over classical models [ 73]. On the other hand,
complex models also tend to be opaque and less transparent than their classical and arguably
simpler counterparts. Therefore, towards an important goal of ensuring a reliable and trustworthy
IR systems, recent years have seen increased interest in the area of explainable information retrieval
(ExIR).
1.1 Motivation
Firstly, in IR, there has been sufficient evidence of how user interaction data from search engines
can be a source of biases, especially associated with gender and ethnicity [ 13, 83, 100]. When
undetected and unidentified, the users of an IR system too are exposed to stereotypical biases that
reinforce known yet unfair prejudices. Secondly, model retrieval models based on transformer-style
over-parameterized models can be brittle and sensitive to small adversarial errors [132]. Recently
developed inductive biases, pre-training procedures, and transfer learning practices might lead
these statistical over-parameterized models to learn shortcuts [44]. Consequently, shortcuts that do
not align with human understanding results in learning patterns that areright for the wrong reasons.
Finally, expert users using specialized search systems – in legal search, medicine, journalism,
and patent search – need control, agency, and lineage of the search results. For all the above
IR-centric reasons, among many other general reasons – like utility for legal compliance, scientific
investigation, and model debugging – the field of ExIR provides the tools/primitives to examine
learning models and the capability to build transparent IR systems.
1.2 The Landscape of Explainable Information Retrieval
Although interpretability in IR is a fairly recent phenomenon, there has been a large amount of
growing yet unorganized work that covers many tasks and aspects of data-driven models in IR.
This survey aims to collect, organize and synthesize the progress in ExIR in the last few years. ExIR
Authors’ addresses: Avishek Anand, avishek.anand@tudelft.nl; Lijun Lyu, L.Lyu@tudelft.nl, Delft University of Technology,
P.O. Box 1212, Delft, The Netherlands; Maximilian Idahl, idahl@l3s.de; Yumeng Wang, wang@l3s.de; Jonas Wallat, wallat@
l3s.de; Zijian Zhang, zzhang@l3s.de, L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Appelstr. 9a, Hannover, Lower
Saxony, Germany.
arXiv:2211.02405v1  [cs.IR]  4 Nov 2022