16 Avishek Anand, Lijun Lyu, Maximilian Idahl, Yumeng Wang, Jonas Wallat, and Zijian Zhang
of the principled, axiomatic notions of relevance. This has the benefits of faster convergence [104],
improved performance [26] or generalization ability [24, 104], and improved interpretability [24].
The method by which the ranking models are regularized varies from adding a regularization term
to the loss function [24, 104] to axiomatically perturbing the training data to amplify desirable
properties [26]. An example of such a regularization term is applied by Chen et al. [24] who add a
relevance loss to their final loss function that checks how well the model’s relevance judgments
coincides with the axioms’. Cheng and Fang [26] extend the training dataset by randomly sam-
pling instances and perturbing them according to three document length normalization axioms,
such as by adding noise terms. Then, these more noisy documents are assigned a lower relevancy
value. From such perturbed data examples, the model is expected to understand the corresponding
normalization axiom based on document length. While current regularization methods offer only
limited (perceived) interpretability, the approach similar to the neuro-symbolic approaches [108]
marry the benefits of both axioms and data-driven models.
6.4 Evaluation
IR axioms have been applied in various works over the past decades, and many revolve around
interpretability. However, little formal evaluation of the insights gained through the axioms has
been done from an interpretability perspective. One exception is Chen et al. [24], who give anecdotal
examples of their axiomatically regularized model’s input attribution being more sparse and focused
on relevant tokens. In addition, only Völske et al. [128] use established interpretability evaluation
metrics and measure the fidelity of their generated (post-hoc) explanations. From the interpretability
perspective, two steps are needed for upcoming work: 1), proposing new axioms or methods to
better explain neural ranking models and 2), rigorously evaluating the produced explanations with
established metrics and eventually human acceptance studies.
7 PROBING AND PARAMETRIC ANALYSIS OF TEXT RANKING MODELS
Probing is a method to analyze the content of latent embeddings. It allows us to understand the
information encoded in the model’s representations. Usually, probing includes training a small
classifier to predict the property of interest (e.g., part-of-speech tags or question types) directly
from the embeddings [9, 121, 122, 127].
7.1 The Probing Methodology
Figure 8 shows an example in which we test whether a ranking model encodes information on
different question types.
What attracts tourists to Rome? Location
Embeddings
Frozen
Ranker
Probe
Model
Fig. 8. Example of the probing paradigm. A small classifier (the probe model) is used to predict properties (in
this case the question type) from a ranker’s frozen representations.
To do so, we need a small, labeled dataset of questions and their respective question types.
We then train the probing classifier to recover the question type information from the ranker’s
frozen embeddings. Originally, the model would be considered to encode the property of interest
if the classifier can better predict it than a majority classifier. However, depending on the task’s
difficulty, dataset size, and classifier complexity, large portions of the resulting performance must
be attributed to the classifier. Therefore, a large set of improvements to the probing paradigm have
Pre-print