Fig. 5. Example bar chart visualization of feature attributions for different groups of tokens.

In addition to Integrated Gradients, Zhan et al. [141] also use attention weights to obtain feature attributions for a BERT-based ranking model. With an experimental setup similar to Qiao et al. [95], they compute attribution scores for different groups of input tokens: The special '[CLS]' and '[SEP]' tokens, the query tokens, the document tokens, and the period token. While confirming that a significant amount of attention weight is distributed to the special tokens and the period token, the authors also find that the attributions produced using attention weights are negatively correlated with the attributions produced by Integrated Gradients. Based on their results, the authors speculate that these tokens receive high attention weights due to their high document frequency. They argue that the model dumps redundant attention on these tokens, while these actually carry little relevance information.

3.3 Evaluating Feature Attributions

Input feature attributions can be evaluated in many ways. However, there is little agreement on which evaluation strategy is best. Sanity-checks [1, 123] test functionally grounded assumptions behind feature attributions. Whether feature attributions are faithful to the model that is explained can also be evaluated by removing important features and re-evaluating model performance, either with or without retraining [58, 79, 103]. However, if the model is not retrained, removing or replacing features can result in out-of-distribution inputs. Other works propose shortcut, artifact, or spurious correlation detection tasks to evaluate feature attributions [2, 7, 59, 137], where bugs are added to a model on purpose and then used as ground-truth for explanation evaluation. Feature attribution methods that rely on surrogate models need to evaluate their fidelity, that is, how well the surrogate model approximates the black box model being explained. Unfortunately, the evaluation of feature attributions in IR is often limited to anecdotal examples. Singh and Anand [112] neither evaluate the explanation quality of EXS nor the fidelity of the local surrogate models used to generate explanations. Verma and Ganguly [125] evaluate LIRME by comparing the explanations to a reference of important terms obtained from relevance judgments but also do not explicitly evaluate faithfulness. Fernando et al. [39] include an analysis of the faithfulness of LIME explanations for neural ranking models by measuring accuracy and mean-squared error of the local surrogate model. To evaluate explanations produced by DeepSHAP, they use LIME explanations as a reference. Directly optimizing explanations based on evaluation metrics, as done by Singh et al. [115], seems advantageous, but does not provide any guarantees of finding a good explanation. Based on the limited work on evaluating feature attributions in IR, we argue that claims and hypotheses based on insights from feature attribution explanations should be handled with caution unless the explanation methodology has been evaluated rigorously.