Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 11
ery:can you do yoga from a chair
Rank Score Document Text
1
2
3
4
5
9.37
9.34
9.31
9.31
9.29
10 Yoga Poses You Can Do in a Chair | Chair pose yoga, Chair yoga, Yoga poses ...
Chair Hip Opening And Strength Flow Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits ...
Chair Seated Twists Yoga | Yoga Sequences, Benefits, Variations, and Sanskrit ... 
5 Best Yoga Ball Chair for Homes and Offices (2021 Buying Guide) - Learn ... 
Chair Yoga for Seniors: 8 Chair Yoga Poses Seniors Can Do Easily At Home ...
+ {poses, guide, home, how, hip, sequence, learn}
Fig. 6. Example of query expansion terms (green) as explanations. The expansion terms are chosen such that
an interpretable term-based ranker best approximates the ranking of documents produced by a black-box
ranking model.
with a variety of ranking models, including RM3 [ 67], DESM [85], DRMM [46], P-DRMM [80],
trained on the Robust04 collection [129], they show that this approach can produce explanations
with high fidelity.
4.1.2 Generating Query Descriptions. Zhang et al. [143] introduce a Query-to-Intent-Description
task for query understanding. Given a query and a set of both relevant and irrelevant documents,
the goal is to generate a natural language intent description. To solve this task, they propose
CtrsGen, a contrastive generation model that generates a query intent description by contrasting
the relevant and irrelevant documents. The training data for CtrsGen consists of multiple TREC and
SemEval [23] collections that already include query descriptions. Although not explicitly discussed
by Zhang et al. [143], CtrsGen can be used to explain query intents as understood by a black-box
ranker by selecting relevant and irrelevant documents based on the output of the ranking model.
However, it has not yet been examined whether the generations of CtrsGen explain the underlying
ranking model faithfully.
4.2 Explaining Document Relevance
A recent line of work in explainable document retrieval aims to explain why a document or a set of
documents is considered relevant to a query by generating free-text explanations. Compared to
other model-agnostic explanation methods, free-text explanations are not limited to explaining
document relevance using features that are already contained in the input. A user study by [97]
suggests that adding free-text document relevance explanations to search engine result pages can
help users identify relevant documents faster and more accurately.
4.2.1 Pointwise Explanations. Rahimi et al. [97] generate document relevance explanations for
individual query-document pairs. They propose GenEx, a transformer-based model that outputs
free-text document relevance explanations. Given a query-document pair, GenEx learns to generate
a text sequence that explains why the document is relevant to the query. The explanations consist
of only a few words instead of whole snippets, and explicitly avoid reusing the terms already
contained in the query. The model uses an encoder-decoder architecture, with the decoder being
extended by a query-masking mechanism to decrease the probability of generating tokens that are
already contained in the query. The training data consists of query-document-explanation triplets
and is automatically constructed from Wikipedia articles and the ClueWeb09 dataset [18].
4.2.2 Listwise Explanations. Yu et al. [138] argue that explaining documents independently is
inherently limited. Per-document explanations do not explain differences between documents, and
a single document can potentially cover multiple query aspects at the same time. As a solution,
they propose a listwise explanation generator (LiEGe) that for a given query jointly explains all the
documents contained in a ranked result list. LiEGe is based on an encoder-decoder transformer
Pre-print