Explainable Information Retrieval: A Survey 27
A deeper problem lies in the absence of ground truth for evaluating or validating the accuracy of
output explanations of post-hoc methods. Unfortunately, this leads to a chicken-and-egg problem
that is hard to fix – to evaluate an explanation, one needs a mechanism to generate or collect ground
truth, which in the first place is the objective of the interpretability task . If we indeed have a procedure
to create ground-truth explanations from a black-box model, that is, to determine what exactly the
model pays attention to, then we would have solved the problem. Note that this is in stark contrast
to standard ML tasks, where the ground-truth are indeed the observed variables that are explicitly
specified in the data. While intrinsic methods in the absence of ground-truth explanations are
reasonable proxies, they still do not answer the utility question of explanations – that is, to what
extent do the explanations assist the end-user in performing a given task. Examples of tasks depend
upon the stakeholder. For a machine learning expert, the task can be explanation-based model
debugging, while for an end-user the question would be why the machine learning model ranks an
obviously relevant document lower than an irrelevant document. Apart from these open questions,
we believe that there is ample opportunity for explainable IR methods to many vertical search
applications like medical search [49], high-recall search [22], scholarly and historical search [55–57].
Apart from specialized search application, explainable IR has direct applications in knowledge
intensive tasks that use an information retrieval component like fact checking [40, 93, 147], question
answering [105], entity addition [114].
11 CONCLUSION
We provided an extensive investigation into the state of ExIR research. We fill a distinct gap in the
IR literature to curate, organize, and synthesize works relating to explainability of learning systems.
Our analysis reveals that while post-hoc interpretability was heavily researched in the initial years,
current efforts are trying to propose approaches that are interpretable by design (IBD). Due to a
variety of design choices in IBD models, we find that authors are often vague about the extent
and style of interpretability in their IBD approaches. We explored the feature-attribution, free-
text generation, and adversarial examples for post-hoc interpretability. Moreover, we summarize
methods that make use of well-established IR principles to explain and probe ranking models.
Finally, we explored the two major subtypes of IBD methods for IR tasks. Based on our findings,
we reflect on the design trade-offs and experimental protocols that are used in evaluating ExIR
approaches. In the end, we present some limitations and open questions that we foresee as the next
steps toward building transparent, trustworthy search systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge all the helpful comments from the anonymous reviewers, and funding from DFG
AN 996/1-1.
REFERENCES
[1] Julius Adebayo, Justin Gilmer, Michael Muelly, Ian J. Goodfellow, Moritz Hardt, and Been Kim. 2018. Sanity Checks
for Saliency Maps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada , Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo
Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett (Eds.). 9525–9536. https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/294a8ed24b1ad22ec2e7efea049b8737-Abstract.html
[2] Julius Adebayo, Michael Muelly, Harold Abelson, and Been Kim. 2022. Post hoc Explanations may be Ineffective for
Detecting Unknown Spurious Correlation. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=xNOVfCCvDpM
[3] Gianni Amati and Cornelis Joost Van Rijsbergen. 2002. Probabilistic Models of Information Retrieval Based on
Measuring the Divergence from Randomness. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 20, 4 (2002), 357–389. https://doi.org/10.1145/
582415.582416
Pre-print